Massachusetts is entering the third week of a stay-at-home advisory, with the worst of the coronavirus pandemic still ahead.
WELLFLEET — For most Cape and Islands businesses and their employees, making money during the 12 to 14 weeks of summer is crucial to their continued success. But with the coronavirus pandemic raging worldwide it’s looking like this summer will be unlike any other.
“When something this massive happens, there’s a realignment of priorities,” said Mac Hay, of Wellfleet. Hay, who owns three restaurants, two retail seafood businesses and a motel, said that coming into a new season he’s typically looking to adjust, trim the sails to fit company goals and continue making money.
“A good plan leads to profit,” Hay said. “But now, profit is not the main goal. Survival is the main goal.”
Massachusetts is entering the third week of a stay-at-home advisory, with the worst of the coronavirus pandemic still ahead. Last week, Gov. Charlie Baker extended the advisory and the state closure of nonessential businesses, including sit-down restaurants, to May 4.
Read more coronavirus news on Cape Cod
That’s precariously close to Memorial Day weekend, the gateway to the heart of the Cape and Islands’ business year, with no definitive answers yet as to when this will end.
“I really worry about what this is going to mean for countless people’s livelihood if the public health risk persists into the summer,” said state Sen. Julian Cyr.
“This is tough for anyone if it drags on. But for people who live in tourist areas, there are many who need these 12 weeks to make a living, and won’t have another chance at that again for 14 months,” said Jay Coburn, chief executive officer of the Community Development Partnership.
Municipalities have already started reining in spending for this fiscal year’s anticipated revenue shortfalls, and are girding for significantly reduced revenues and budgets in the next fiscal year given anticipated economic hardship on the local and national level. Revenue from state aid, sales, meals, room and short-term rental taxes, as well as local fees associated with summer like beach stickers, parking and marinas may all be in jeopardy.
Cancellations related to coronavirus on Cape Cod and the Islands
“We know that we are going to miss whatever bump we get from April vacation week. The typical Memorial Day bump could be impacted greatly, and, when the kids get out of school in June, that bump as well,” said Harwich Interim Town Administrator Joseph Powers. The town is under a hiring freeze, including hiring seasonal employees who are necessary to meet summer demand for beaches, parks, marinas, and other summer pursuits.
Beach and parks fees alone bring in millions of dollars buttressing town funds for local projects across the Cape. Online sales of beach stickers have typically netted her department $30,000 by this time of year, said Wellfleet beach director Suzanne Grout Thomas.
“This year, about $3,000,” she said. “I think people are holding on to see what’s going to happen in the next six weeks.”
Some aren’t waiting to pull the plug. At least one local town has already shut down July 4th fireworks. The Cape Cod Institute, a summerlong series of weeklong seminars that attracts hundreds of psychologists, psychiatrists and mental health professionals to the Outer Cape, shut its doors after 25 summers, announcing on its website that it is “unable to remain a viable company in light of the pandemic.”
The state’s House Committee on Ways and Means will hold a special conference this week on revenue estimates for the next fiscal year, Powers said.
While there was some optimism initially that unprecedented social distancing on a widespread scale could reduce transmission levels enough to have everything back up and running for summer, epidemiologists and public health officials caution that we still don’t know enough about novel coronavirus and the disease it causes, COVID-19, to be certain that can happen. And they worry that yielding to economic pressure and reopening too soon might result in a resurgence of the disease that will have far worse and longer lasting economic and health impacts.
Summer usually brings relief from similar virus outbreaks, like the seasonal flu. The dry air of winter shrinks airborne virus microbes making them lighter and able to remain suspended longer in the air for us to inhale. But summer humidity means molecules retain more moisture, so they are heavier and drop quickly onto surfaces where they are less likely to be picked up and transmitted. Transmission is also enhanced in winter because we are indoors in tight quarters much of the day.
Harvard University T.H. Chan School of Public Health epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch cautioned against relying on summer to end this outbreak. Florida, Hong Kong, Australia and Singapore have all seen transmission in summerlike conditions.
“Summer alone is not going to bring transmission to a level where the number of cases shrinks. It’s really clear that warmer weather does not stop the transmission or growth of the virus,” he said of novel coronavirus in a March 30 fact-check in “The Guardian.”
In the same article, Lipsitch forecast repeated rounds of social distancing with a buildup of immunity in the population gradually helping to slow the spread as the world waits for a vaccine. That “will be destructive to the economy, to education, and all sorts of things,” Lipsitch said in the article.
Lacking a presidential order to do so, the uneven application of stay-at-home and social distancing across the country may mean the reintroduction of the virus to areas where controls have been relaxed.
Uncertainty haunts employees, employers and municipalities as they plan for a summer like no other before it. In a recent article in the Times, real estate brokers and agents said summer rental home inquiries ground to a halt and that they were racking up cancellations on the bookings they had secured before the lockdown. Airbnb, the online company known for short-term rentals, said the trend they are following is the conversion to longer-term rentals of 28 days or more as health workers look for housing that will isolate them from family.
Even as they contemplate worse-case scenarios most businesses and towns must prepare for some kind of summer. They are balancing finances with the need to have help on hand if everything does open up for summer.
Hay projected a 50% decline in business from previous years. His staff grows to around 300 employees in the summer, but Hay estimates he’ll probably be closer to 150 this year.
Peter Hall just changed the sign in front of his South Wellfleet restaurant Van Rensselaer’s from its traditional Easter weekend opening to a May opening. Even that may be too optimistic as he anticipates another possible delay.
“It’s hard because there’s a lot of people (employees and some customers) not believing things were happening,” he said. He estimated about a third fewer employees for his business this summer. Like many, he’s trying to accommodate a new reality, with fewer tables in the dining rooms to allow for more space between customers. That too will affect the bottom line with fewer people served every night and less business for serving staff and the kitchen.
“Here’s a sobering number,” said Steve Clark, vice president of governmental affairs for the Massachusetts Restaurant Association. “In the first 22 days of March, the industry was down $583 million in sales and lost 85,000 jobs.”
The restaurant industry is the second largest private employer in the state, said Clark, accounting for 10% of the workforce, $18 billion in sales, and $1.25 billion in meals tax collection last year.
“I believe Massachusetts has the fourth most seasonal restaurant jobs in the country, the vast majority driven by the Cape,” he said.

“Everyone I talk to feels the same, that (Cape summer business) will be off 40% to 50%,” said Hall, whose restaurant has been in business on the same spot for 40 years. It reminds him a little of the recession in 1988, except banks were unwilling to lend money and there was a serious cash flow problem for businesses. Hall was encouraged by the $2 trillion aid package recently passed by Congress.
“I’m hoping one of these programs is fairly good and we can survive,” Hall said.
The Community Development Partnership helps low- to moderate-income residents on the Lower Cape by supporting small businesses and creating affordable housing. But Coburn said they too have a serious cash flow problem and are in the process of applying for emergency grants to meet payroll.
Although the CDP has closed its doors to meetings, training and workshops, he and his staff are helping small businesses apply for government aid programs like the Payroll Protection Program that funds loans of up to $10 million for businesses with fewer than 500 employees. Coburn said that these loans, which cover payroll, rent, some maintenance and other expenses may be forgiven if the business retains its workforce.
“It really is a well-crafted response,” Coburn said, although news reports Friday said the program was having some trouble getting off the ground.
“I hear loud and clear that, for a lot of small businesses, they are not going to be able to lend their way out of this disaster,” said Coburn in describing the reaction to the Small Business Administration loans that are also part of the COVID-19 relief package and come with 3.75% interest.
While the state released an economic development bill prior to the current crisis that could help, Coburn said it may be jeopardized by declining revenues.
“The state has to have a balanced budget and it can’t borrow money as the feds can,” he said.
In addition to its small-business programs, the CDP also has close to 100 families in a community rental program living in properties they either manage or own. The CDP is working on strengthening their safety net, reaching out to fuel and rental assistance programs, including a new $5 million state rental assistance program, at a time when most should be returning to work and gearing up to replenish their finances.
“This month, many are preserving their cash ... what limited savings they may have,” said Coburn. “I think people are really struggling. We don’t know how long this state of emergency will be, but every week goes on longer makes it more difficult.”
Cape Cod Chamber of Commerce CEO Wendy Northcross said business owners she talks to feel they can open as late as the Fourth of July and still salvage the season.
“If it goes deeper into July, I don’t get many answers,” she said.
Still, she said business owners are optimistic given the aid coming out of Washington, with more promised. The one bright spot they agree on is that when the Cape does reopen for business there will be a lot of pent-up demand. The Cape is positioned well geographically for those wanting to avoid flying, within a day’s drive of many population centers. But the region will not escape unscathed.
“I think you will see dramatic changes,” Northcross said. The ranks will get thinned, restaurants and others will do business differently.
“But what I know of Cape Codders and New Englanders is that they have a strong entrepreneurial spirit. Underpin that with good rentals, capital, and a workforce with the right skills and it’ll be fine,” she said.
Follow Doug Fraser on Twitter:@dougfrasercct.